---
title: "2021"
date: 2022-01-19T15:04:41Z
draft: false
tags: [2021, Janja Garnbret, Will Bosi, 9b list, graph]
summary: Full list of 2021s hardest ascents, a graph comparing previous years, a list of unrepeated 9b's, and a look at a few of the ongoing projects.
chartjs: false
apexchart: true
---

2021 saw 24 redpoints of 9b or harder. The previous highpoint was 14 ascents in both 2018 and 2019. However with suggested downgrades and slash grades up to 10 of those listed may end up not making the cut. Time and future consensus will tell. Even at worst though 2021 would still equal 2018 and 19.

2021 was also the year of climbing's first Olympic Games and this undoubtedly took energy away from outdoor sport climbing. Interestingly almost half of the routes listed were climbed in the last two months of the year.

Highlights of the year were Will Bosi's new routes in the *La Capella* sector in Siurana. The hardest, *King Capella*, was originally 9b+ but  but Jakob Schubert felt it was more like 9b. He made the third ascent of the route in 6 days.

In France Stefano Ghisolfi made the second ascent of Alex Megos's 2019 route *Bibliography*. Originally graded 9c, the second route of the grade in the world, Ghisolfi found new beta and said the route was 9b+. Sean Bailey made third ascent and fastest ascent so far, particularly impressive as he'd never climbed a 9b before and had only climbed two 9a+'s before.

Women's climbing took a step forward when Janja Garnbret raised the top onsight grade to 8c by onsighting not one but two 8c's at Oliana in Spain. In Italy Laura Rogora made a very impressive second ascent of Stefano Ghisolfi's *Erebor* taking just 6 days. The route was given 9b/+ at the time but was later confirmed as 9b by both Adam Ondra and Jakob Schubert who made the third and fourth ascents. Laura Rogora is probably[^1] the second or third female to climb at this level after Angy Eiter who climbed *La Planta de Shiva* in 2017 and Julia Chanourdie who climbed *Eagle-4* in 2020.

## No. of 9b ascents by year

The following graph shows the number of ascents of 9b and above climbed each year from 2013 onwards. For simplicity's sake slash grades of both 9a+/b and 9b/+ have been listed as 9b's. Some of these are yet to be confirmed as 9b so could end up being downgraded in the future. But even taking that into account it's likely that 2021 is the year with the most hard ascents at this level ever.

{{< graphs/9bs-by-year >}}


## Unrepeated

With quick repeats of *King Capella*, *Erebor*, and *Bibliography* it's easy to get the impression that most of the world's hardest sport routes have been repeated. However as this list shows there are still 20 unrepeated routes of 9b or harder. Will any of these see second ascents in 2022?

1. *Chaxi Raxi* at popular Oliana has a fierce boulder problem start and was first climbed by Adam Ondra over 10 years ago.
2. *Vasil Vasil* the world's third 9b+ is a short and not particularly attractive route.
3. *C.R.S* is a super steep route in Mollans, France. It was bolted by Seb Bouin but first climbed by Adam Ondra in 2015.
4. *Fight Club* Alex Megos's 2016 route is one of two 9b's in Canada, both unrepeated.
5. *Robin Ud* the hardest route in Slovakia first climbed by Adam Ondra in 2016.
6. *Silence* the world's only 9c is unrepeated although UK crack specialist Pete Whittaker bouldered out the crux finding new beta.
7. *Soul Mate* Japan's first 9b a vertical looking crimpfest that undoubtedly suited talented Sachi Amma who made the F.A. in 2018.
8. *Disbelief* a blank looking wall at Mount Carnmore in Canada that Ondra considered was a hard 9b.
9.  *La Barrière*, Can Permin Bertle's suggested Swiss 9b hold it's grade?
10. *Artaburu* a long horizontal roof climbed by pocket specialist Iker Pou at Margalef in Spain.
11. *Rage d'Adam* given 9b/+ by Seb Bouin in 2019.
12. *Obsession* a 2019 route at Orgon, France by Loic Zehani.
13. *The Dream* a fantastic looking tufa route in Albania climbed by Seb Bouin in 2020
14. *Cryptography* the world's hardest slab? This route combines the hardest bits of Bain'd'Sange with the neighbouring 
15. *Soul Rock Dance* is Japan's second 9b first climbed by Hyunbin Min.
16. *Beyond Integrali* a spectacular 9b/+ at Pic St Loup by Seb Bouin.
17. *Madame Ching* The only 9b first climbed by a female. Angy Eiter's impressive looking route in Imst, Austria.
18. *Gugen Hell* is an impressive looking route in Majorca first climbed by Iker Pou. Given a slash grade of 9a+/b.
19. *Cafe Solo* is Margalef's fourth 9b climbed by Jorge Diaz Rullo.
20. *Taurus* is Ondra's boulder problem route at Moravský kras in the Czech Republic. The start is an 8C+ boulder problem.


## Unclimbed

There of course many unclimbed projects that could get completed this year. Noteworthy are Jorge Diaz Rullo's *Cafe Columbia*, a harder alternative to his 9b *Cafe Solo* which he completed last year. Seb Bouin has spent much time on his *DNA* project in the Ramirole sector of the Verdon Gorge this year without success. This looks likely to be a solid 9b+ when complete and Bouin seems locked in to the project. And in Arco, Italy the extended finish to Ondra's 2017 route, *Queen Line*, could turn out to be the world's second 9c.


## Full list of 9b's climbed in 2021

{{< data/nineb2021 >}}


[^1]: The route *Eagle 4* was suggested as only 9a+ by Pierre Le Cerf who made the fourth ascent in February 2022.